Draft spec for auto-discovering feedback provider and tab-completer (#386)
PowerShell/PowerShell-RFC: Draft-Accepted/feedback_completer_auto_discovery.md

# Auto Discovery for Feedback provider and Tab-Completer

## Motivation

Today, to enable a feedback provider or a tab-completer for a native command,
a user has to import a module or run a script manually, or do that in their profile.

> There is no way to auto-discover a feedback provider or a tab-completer for a specific native command.

Reviewer: Should we consider predictors in this set of supported auto discoverable "things"?

Reviewer: For example the completion predictor may be good to auto register since it doesnt really have any commands

Author: There won't be a specific trigger for any predictor, so if needed, a predictor module can just be placed under the `_startup_` folder of `Feedbacks` or `Completions`.

Think about it more, I guess we may want to unify the `_startup_` folders from `feedbacks` and `completions`, since they all will be loaded at startup. Maybe we should have a `startup` folder at the same level of `feedbacks` and `completions`, so any predictor/feedback provider/tab-completer that needs to be loaded at session startup can be put there.

- PowerShell can discover feedback providers and tab-completers automatically, and load one based on the right trigger.
- A user can enable or disable the auto-discovery for a feedback provider or tab-completer.

## Specification

The proposal is to adopt the existing mechnism used in Bash, Zsh and Fish's completion system --
have directories contain individual completion scripts for various commands and applications,
whose file names should match names of the commands.
Those completion scripts are loaded only when their corresponding commands' completion is triggered for the first time.

We will have separate directories for feedback providers and tab-completers, for 2 reasons:

- Trigger is different
  - feedback provider for a specific native command -- execute the command will trigger the discovery.
  - tab-completer for a specific native command -- tab complete on the command will trigger the discovery.
- Implementation is different
  - feedback provider -- a module or an assembly (binary implementation only)
  - tab-completer -- a module or a script (binary or script implementation)

> The folders for feedback providers and tab-completers will be placed under the same path where modules folders are currently located:

Reviewer: Is this going to be affected by the One-Drive issue?

Author: No, it's not. We will use whichever new location that we decide to go with.

   - Check if a feedback provider for this native command is available in the `Feedbacks` paths;
   - If so, check if the specified module already loaded;
   - If not, load it at the `DoComplete` phase, so the feedback provider will be ready right after the native command finishes.

**[NOTE:]** It would be better if we can check if a feedback provider for the native command has already registered before checking the paths,
but unlike the completer registration for native commands, today there is no mapping between a feedback provider and a native command.
Also, it's allowed to register multiple feedback providers for a single native command.

#### Discussion Points

1. Should we expand the string value for `module` key, or always treat the value as literal?
   It feels like a useful feature, but could come with security implication, especially in WDAC/AppLocker enforced environment.
   - Note: PowerShell data file (`.psd1`) doesn't allow environment variables.

2. Should we add another key to indicate the target OS?
   - A feedback provider may only work on a specific OS, such as the `"WinGet CommandNotFound"` feedback provider only works on Windows.

>    - Such a key could be handy if a user wants to share the feedback/tab-completer configurations among multiple machines via a cloud drive.

Reviewer: I think this could be good, thinking about the linux cmd-not-found predictor. Also if a user wants to bring this configuration across their different machines they dont need to have multiple different folder structures? I am not entirely sure how they would necessarily do it but I know some community folks use external tools to share their $PROFILE across machines.

Author: > they dont need to have multiple different folder structures?

Folder structures under `feedbacks` and `completions` are the same. I guess a user can create a symbolic link to make `<personal>/powershell/feedbacks` or `<personal>/powershell/completions` points to the folders from a cloud drive.

> 3. Do we really need a folder for each feedback provider?

Author: Tool installation needs to easily deploy/remove the auto-discovery configuration. We want to avoid updating a single file to make that easy.

The structure of the `feedbacks` folder is as follows:
```none
feedbacks
│
├───_startup_
│   ├───linux-command-not-found
│   │       linux-command-not-found.psd1
│   │
│   └───winget-command-not-found
│           winget-command-not-found.psd1
├───git
│       git.psd1
│
├───kubectl
│       kubectl.psd1
│
├───...
```

Each item within `feedbacks` is a folder.
- `_startup_`: feedback providers declared in this folder will be auto-loaded at the startup of an interactive `ConsoleHost` session.
- `git` or `kubectl`: feedback provider for a specific native command should be declared in a folder named after the native command. It will be auto-loaded when the native command gets executed.

Within each sub-folder, a `.psd1` file named after the folder name should be defined to configure the auto-discovery for the feedback provider.

```powershell
@{
   module = '<module-name-or-path>[@<version>]',  # Module to load to register the feedback provider.
   arguments = @('<arg1>', '<arg2>'),  # Optional arguments for module loading.
   disable = $false,  # Control whether auto-discovery should find this feedback provider.

> }

Reviewer 2: I honestly don't want to see "feedback providers" included in this. Who is asking for that? What's the use case?

I say this not just because I have little interest in installing "things" that allow a _third-party_ to be called each time I use a tool, but because I hate to see the team spending more time on a feature which, as far as I can tell, hasn't been used by anyone but WinGet and @JustinGrote since it was shipped 😉

> }

Author: I'd say you have a fair point :)
If we only care about lazy loading of tab completion for native executables, maybe https://github.com/daxian-dbw/PSNativeToolCompletion is sufficient. It depends on the 'fall-back' completer change introduced in 7.6.

#### Execution Flow

1. At startup, auto-load the enabled tab-completers from the `_startup_` folder of the `completions` paths. Do the auto-loading before processing user's profile.
2. Report what tab-completers were processed and the time taken, in the streaming way.
3. In the completion system, when tab completion is triggered on a native command,
   - Check if a tab-completer for this native command already exists;
   - If not, check if a tab-completer for this native command is available in the `completions` paths;
   - If so, register it either by loading the module or running the script, and then call the tab-completer.

**[NOTE:]** For a specific native command, you can only have 1 active completer for it. So, we will check if a completer already exists for a native command before searching in the paths.

#### Discussion Points

Same discussions as in `Feedback Provider` section:
1. Should we expand the string value for `module` and `script` keys, or always treat the value as literal?
2. Should we add another key to indicate the target OS?

Different discussions:
1. Do we really need a folder for each feedback provider?
   - [dongbo] Yes, I think we need.

>    Appx and MSIX packages on Windows have [many constraints](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell/issues/17283#issuecomment-1522133126) that make it difficult to integrate with a broader plugin ecosystem. The way for such an Appx/MSIX tool to expose tab-completer could be just running the tool with a special flag, such as `<tool> --ps-completion`,

Author: **[Discussion point]** Appx/MSIX package cannot integrate with a broader plugin ecosystem easily [[reference]](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell/issues/17283#issuecomment-1522133126):
- An MSIX package cannot change `$PATH`
  - An MSIX package cannot set a global system environment variable of any sort on install
- An MSIX package cannot write to a user folder (or a system folder outside of its package root) on install.

Additional constraints that make it difficult to integrate Appx/MSIX with a broader plugin ecosystem:

- MSIX packages are "sealed": you're not supposed to be able to poke at their insides without explicit permission
- Packages are not designed to have their DLLs used directly in-proc from another process, because that may break the updatability guarantees around files inside the package not being used.

We should support Appx/MSIX packages without requiring user's manual work. But, how to achieve it given the constrains?

Reviewer 3: That's trivial. An extensibility model has 2 requirements

1. Discovery
2. Access

Both have multiple options with the simplest being Discovery=AppExtension and Access=DynamicDependencies. More details below.

# Discovery

A Powershell extension (be it completer or other scenarios) needs to advertise it exists such that Powershell can discover it. MSIX' standard recommendation is for the packaged app to declare an [appextension](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.applicationmodel.appextensions.appextensioncatalog) in its manifest and Powershell uses the [AppExtensionCatalog API](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.applicationmodel.appextensions.appextensioncatalog) to enumerate these extensions and any needed info about them.

Example snippet in `appxmanifest.xml`

```
<uap3:Extension
    Category="windows.appExtension">
    <uap3:AppExtension
        Name="com.microsoft.powershell.completer"
        Id="winget.completer"
        PublicFolder="public"
        DisplayName="WinGet Completer"/>
</uap3:Extension>
```

and sample enumeration

```
var catalog = new AppExtensionCatalog.Open("com.microsoft.powershell.completer")
foreach (var extension in catalog)
{
    ...use it...
}
```

# Access

Now that you know a package has Powershell extension(s) of interest you need to access file(s) in the package. This requires Windows knows Powershell is using a package's content. The simplest solution is to use the [Dynamic Dependencies API](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows/apps/desktop/modernize/framework-packages/use-the-dynamic-dependency-api) to tell Windows you're using the package's content. This ensures Windows doesn't try to service the package (e.g. updating or removing the package) while in use. It also adds the package to the Powershell process' package graph, making its resources available for LoadLibrary, ActivateInstance and other APIs.

# Recommended But Not Only

These are the commonly recommended solutions for Discovery and Access but there are other options.

## Discovery Alternatives

For access the `windows.packageExtension` can be a good alternative. The `windows.appExtension` extension has app-scope i.e. you must declare it under an `<Application>` and thus can only be defined in Main or Optional packages. `windows.packageExtension` which has package-scope (no app required) and can be declared in any package (including Resource and Framework packages) and use the [PackageExtensionCatalog API](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.applicationmodel.packageextensions.packageextensioncatalog) to enumerate them. This is new in 24H2. The recommendation if you need downlevel support is to use AppExtension (supported since ~RS1) or use both. The latter's advantage is it supports all package types and simpler developer experience in some cases. Using both provides best experience while also providing downlevel support.

## Access Alternatives

Dynamic Dependencies enables you to use several tech to interact with a packaged Powershell extension, e.g. WinRT inproc and out-of-proc (ActivateInstance), inproc DLLs (LoadLibrary), inproc .NET assemblies (Assembly.Load*()), read a text file (CreateFile(GetPackagePath()+"\foo.ps1") and other like tech.

NOTE: Inproc is generally discouraged for extensibility models given the reliability and security implications. Technically feasible of course as there are times it's necessary (especially older legacy software), but if you can do better, do better :-)

There are other options if you need code a package -- Packaged COM OOP servers, AppServices, etc. Some don't require Dynamic Dependencies but bring their other caveats to the table so while supported the Dynamic Dependencies options are recommended.

Reviewer 3: And note, the MSIX discovery+access recommendations are easily secure. Package content is strongly secure and verifiably trustable. When Powershell uses a package's content it can be assured the content is authentic and unmodified from the developer.

Package authors can be Store signed or declare 

```
<uap10:PackageIntegrity>
  <uap10:Content Enforcement="on"/>
</uap10:PackageIntegrity>
```

and its content is hardened even a process running as LocalSystem can't alter the package's files. Powershell can use various APIs to confirm the package is signed and is unmodified e.g. [Package.SignatureKind](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.applicationmodel.package.signaturekind), [Package.Status.VerifyIsOK()](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.applicationmodel.packagestatus.verifyisok), [Package.VerifyContentIntegrityAsync()](https://learn.microsoft.com/uwp/api/windows.applicationmodel.package.verifycontentintegrityasync). This can jive well with Powershell's `ExecutionPolicy` options.

   - `PSReadLine` is disabled when this flag is specified, so maybe this feature should be disabled too.
3. Shall we disable the feature with the `-noprofile` flag?
   - The "loading at startup" part of the feature is similar to how profiles are processed, but it's not part of the profile.
4. Shall we add a flag (or flags) to allow user to disable this feature (or disable `feedback` and `completer` separately)?
5. We report progress when loading `feedback` or `completer` at startup, so how to allow users to disable the progress report?
   - We have the `-NoProfileLoadTime` flag today to not show the time taken for running profile.
6. How about on a System Lockdown Mode (SLM) or Restricted remoting environments?
   - We use `.psd1` file for metadata, which can be signed if needed.

### Unified Location for load-at-startup Configurations

There could be a similar demand for a predictor module. There won't be a specific trigger for any predictors,
so for a predictor to be auto-discovered, it has to be loaded at the startup of an interactive session.

Given that, maybe it's better to have a unified location for all the load-at-startup configurations:

> 

Reviewer 3: MSIX packages can explicitly declare this sort of information e.g.

```
<uap3:Extension
    Category="windows.appExtension">
    <uap3:AppExtension
        Name="com.microsoft.powershell.completer"
        Id="winget.completer"
        PublicFolder="public"
        DisplayName="WinGet Completer">
        <uap3:Properties>
            <Tab-Completers>
                <Tab-Completer Type="Powershell" Name="foo" File="foo\bar.s1" />
                <Tab-Completer Type="WinRT" Name="blah" ActivatableClassId="blah.de.blah.de.blah" Load="startup"/>
                <Tab-Completer Type="DLLExport" Name="meh" File="in\proc.dll" Function="CallMe" Discovery="auto"/>
            </Tab-Completers>
        </uap3:Properties>
</uap3:Extension>
```

The data under `<uap3:Properties>` can be as elaborate as you need and desire.

This model can securely provide explicit details and avoid ambiguitities (No `startup` folder? Is that intentional? Accidentally deleted? CHKDSK removed it? Malware tampered?).

This also offers better performance than walking the filesystem and reading/parsing files to determine what to do.

And it ensures clean behavior on uninstall - packages registered for the user are discoverable and cleanly become invisible when the package is deregistered for the user. No concerns about incomplete uninstalls or manual hackery or otherwise 'winrot' leaving the system in inconsistent states.

Reviewer 3: BTW if you need to have an ordered list of packaged extensions the common solutions are implicit-ordering-by-name and explicit-ordering.

AppExtensionCatalog etc enumerate packages but the results are an unordered list. If you're concerned about collisions  then searching in a list needs a deterministic way to avoid collisions if possible and mitigate/control impact when not. Couple of common options:

1. Implicit Order

You can order the list based on values in the data, e.g. given

```
<uap3:Extension
    Category="windows.appExtension">
    <uap3:AppExtension
        Name="com.microsoft.powershell.completer"
        Id="winget.completer"
...
```

you can build a list of tab-completers sorted by [`Id`, `PackageFullName`] (not just name as that's not guaranteed unique across packages).

One example is how MSIX' package graph orders Resource packages for a given Main package (alphabetically by the Resource package's Name).

One downside is this can lead to perverse games by not-good-natured actors, e.g. `Id="AAAAAAAA.winget.completer"`.

2. Explicit Order

A common alternative is for the extension to explicitly tell you a hint where they'd like to appear in the search order e.g. `Rank` in the example

```
<uap3:Extension
    Category="windows.appExtension">
    <uap3:AppExtension
        ..
        <uap3:Properties>
            <Tab-Completers>
                <Tab-Completer Type="Powershell" Name="foo" Rank="123" File="foo\bar.s1" />
                <Tab-Completer Type="WinRT" Name="blah" ActivatableClassId="blah.de.blah.de.blah" Load="startup"/>
                <Tab-Completer Type="DLLExport" Name="meh" Rank="-500" File="in\proc.dll" Function="CallMe" Discovery="auto"/>
            </Tab-Completers>
        </uap3:Properties>
</uap3:Extension>
```
where `Rank`=integer, default=0, and the end list is sorted small to large (`-infinity...0...+infinity`).

MSIX does this via [AddPackageDependency()](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows/win32/api/appmodel/nf-appmodel-addpackagedependency) as one example. Visual C++ did a similar thing via a `#pragma` where you could specify when in the order of global constructors a symbol? .obj? should appear.

Reviewer 3: Of course this data is how package authors define their content. Powershell could provide overrides if you so choose, e.g. if my profile has 

```
$tab_completers_override = []{ "winget.completer" = []{ "rank"=100 } }
```

where you enumerate package extension info and selectively override data with override values (if any). This makes it easy for devs to DoTheirThing(TM) and ItJustWorks(TM) with the user/admin still in control to override devs if need be (e.g. "Yes `foo` is defined to appear in the ordered list before `bar` but that's problematic for now so force `foor` to appear later, 'cause, _I_ say so..." :-) )

Reviewer 3: ping

Been a while. Any update on this concept to share here at this time?

## Motivation

Today, to enable a feedback provider or a tab-completer for a native command,
a user has to import a module or run a script manually, or do that in their profile.
There is no way to auto-discover a feedback provider or a tab-completer for a specific native command.

As a tool author, I want to provide a feedback provider or a tab-completer along with my tool installation,
but I don't want to mess with user's profile to make the feedback provider or tab-completer discoverable.

As a user, I want my feedback providers and tab-completers for the specific native commands to be loaded lazily,
instead of having to use my profile to load them at session startup.

Relevant GitHub issues:
- [Enable loading of Feedback providers via config](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell/issues/25115)
- [Add a way to lazily autoload argument completers](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell/issues/17283)

## Target Scenario

For PowerShell commands (Function or Cmdlet), I presume the completion or feedback support,
if there is any, will be from the same module.
So, when the command becomes available, the feedback provider and/or tab-completer will become available too.

> Therefore, the auto-discovery for feedback provider and tab-completer targets native commands only.

Reviewer 2: Just for the record, there's been a lot of discussion in Discord chat where people are going so far as to use dynamic parameters just to try and create argument completion for standalone scripts. It might be worth considering them as well.

## Goals

- A tool can deploy its feedback provider and/or tab-completer without needing to update a file at a central location, such as the user's profile.
- A tool can remove its deployment cleanly without needing to update a file at a central location.
- PowerShell can discover feedback providers and tab-completers automatically, and load one based on the right trigger.
- A user can enable or disable the auto-discovery for a feedback provider or tab-completer.

## Specification

The proposal is to adopt the existing mechnism used in Bash, Zsh and Fish's completion system --
have directories contain individual completion scripts for various commands and applications,
whose file names should match names of the commands.
Those completion scripts are loaded only when their corresponding commands' completion is triggered for the first time.

> We will have separate directories for feedback providers and tab-completers, for 2 reasons:

Reviewer 4: This will make it not possible for an Appx app to participate since they can't place files outside of their own installed folder

Author: I mentioned Appx and MSIX packages in the "Discussion Points" below. I think for those apps:
- If they want to provide tab-completer, then the tab-completer needs to be exposed by running the tool with a special flag, such as `<tool> --ps-completion`, then the user can manually create the "deployment+configuration" for the tool using the output script. Or, even better, the user can just run the output script, which will create the deployment automatically.
- If they want to provide feedback provider, I'm not sure how that will be possible. According to https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell/issues/17283#issuecomment-1522133126, the tool's DLL should not be used by another process, but feedback provider and predictor are binary implementation only.

Reviewer 4: @daxian-dbw I believe this has been resolved so that we can enable Appx packaged commands to expose PS integration, can you update?

Reviewer 3: > This will make it not possible for an Appx app to participate since they can't place files outside of their own installed folder

They _could_, but it's strongly discouraged. We've done it before in rare cases and they've all gone sideways griefing devs, users and us. They also degrade MSIX's security and integrity models. So, yeah, we prefer not to go here w/o suuuuper high business justification, and even then it usually needs a huge backwards compatibility element.

I don't see sufficient justification here, especially not with Powershell under active development. There are better answers.

The folders for feedback providers and tab-completers will be placed under the same path where modules folders are currently located:

- In-box path: `$PSHOME/feedbacks` and `$PSHOME/completions`
- Current user path: `<personal>/PowerShell/feedbacks` and `<personal>/PowerShell/completions`
- All user path: `<shared>/PowerShell/feedbacks` and `<shared>/PowerShell/completions`

### Feedback Provider

There are 2 kinds of feedback providers:

1. One that covers different commands and different scenarios. For example,
  the [WinGet CommandNotFound](https://www.powershellgallery.com/packages/Microsoft.WinGet.CommandNotFound/1.0.4.0) feedback provider
  acts on `"CommandNotFound"` error and suggests the `WinGet` installation command if the tool that user tried to execute can be installed with `WinGet`.

2. One that convers a specific command. For example, a feedback provider for `git`.

The 1st kind doesn't have a specific corresponding trigger, so the auto-discovery for it only happens at the startup of a session.</br>
The 2nd kind can use the native command name as the specific trigger, and the auto-discovery happens when the command gets executed.

> The strucutre of the `feedbacks` folder is as follows:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The structure of the `feedbacks` folder is as follows:
```

    - use the expanded value as the module name for module loading

#### Execution Flow

1. At startup, auto-load the enabled feedback providers from the `_startup_` folder of the `feedbacks` paths. Do the auto-loading before processing user's profile.
2. Report what feedback providers were processed and the time taken, in the streaming way.
3. In `NativeCommandProcessor`, when a native command gets executed,
   - Check if a feedback provider for this native command is available in the `feedbacks` paths;
   - If so, check if the specified module already loaded;
   - If not, load it at the `DoComplete` phase, so the feedback provider will be ready right after the native command finishes.

**[NOTE:]** It would be better if we can check if a feedback provider for the native command has already registered before checking the paths,
but unlike the completer registration for native commands, today there is no mapping between a feedback provider and a native command.
Also, it's allowed to register multiple feedback providers for a single native command.

#### Discussion Points

1. Should we expand the string value for `module` key, or always treat the value as literal?

>    It feels like a useful feature, but could come with security implication, especially in WDAC/AppLocker enforced environment.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   It feels like a useful feature, but could come with security implications, especially in System Lockdown Mode (SLM) or Restricted remoting environments.
```

1. The feature only works when the PowerShell host is `ConsoleHost` or the `Visual Studio Code Host` (which uses `ConsoleHost` internally IIRC).
   - Today, only `ConsoleHost` consumes feedback providers.
2. The feature should be disabled when PowerShell starts with `-Command` or `-File` to run a command or a file and then terminates.
   - So, when `-noexit` is specifeid, the feature should be enabled if other conditions are satisfied.
2. Shall we disable the feature with the `-noninteractive` flag?
   - `PSReadLine` is disabled when this flag is specified, so maybe this feature should be disabled too.
3. Shall we disable the feature with the `-noprofile` flag?
   - The "loading at startup" part of the feature is similar to how profiles are processed, but it's not part of the profile.
4. Shall we add a flag (or flags) to allow user to disable this feature (or disable `feedback` and `completer` separately)?
5. We report progress when loading `feedback` or `completer` at startup, so how to allow users to disable the progress report?
   - We have the `-NoProfileLoadTime` flag today to not show the time taken for running profile.

> 6. How about on a WDAC/AppLocker enforced environment?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
6. How about on a System Lockdown Mode (SLM) or Restricted remoting environments?
```

# Auto Discovery for Feedback provider and Tab-Completer

## Motivation

Today, to enable a feedback provider or a tab-completer for a native command,
a user has to import a module or run a script manually, or do that in their profile.
There is no way to auto-discover a feedback provider or a tab-completer for a specific native command.

As a tool author, I want to provide a feedback provider or a tab-completer along with my tool installation,

> but I don't want to mess with user's profile to make the feedback provider or tab-completer discoverable.

Reviewer 3: Does this same solution also handle scripts and modules? Or extended to do so?

As a user, I want my feedback providers and tab-completers for the specific native commands to be loaded lazily,

> instead of having to use my profile to load them at session startup.

Reviewer 6: There are testing cases where you may want to disable this as well as showcasing the feature whilst training people on using PowerShell.

Can we get a mechanism to disable this via another parameter on pwsh, an entry in the powershell.config.json file or both?

Can we also get some data around the difference in user experience for lazyloading in terms of delays caused by waiting to load it vs having already pre-loaded these.
I don't expect in many cases the difference to be huge, but would be very much worth having (especially ran on older lower powered & locked down devices)

I ask as I feel that there are cases where it makes more sense for users to make use `Session specific profile loading` in some cases like I do with my Minimal Profile vs vs many using a `1 Profile to rule it all` approach.

Relevant GitHub issues:
- [Enable loading of Feedback providers via config](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell/issues/25115)
- [Add a way to lazily autoload argument completers](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell/issues/17283)

## Target Scenario

For PowerShell commands (Function or Cmdlet), I presume the completion or feedback support,
if there is any, will be from the same module.

> So, when the command becomes available, the feedback provider and/or tab-completer will become available too.

Reviewer 6: This is the ideal situation - however many modules, especially those included in Windows, don't provide this and ends up being made available either via a 3rd party module or via a users profile.

Therefore, the auto-discovery for feedback provider and tab-completer targets native commands only.

## Goals

- A tool can deploy its feedback provider and/or tab-completer without needing to update a file at a central location, such as the user's profile.
- A tool can remove its deployment cleanly without needing to update a file at a central location.
- PowerShell can discover feedback providers and tab-completers automatically, and load one based on the right trigger.

> - A user can enable or disable the auto-discovery for a feedback provider or tab-completer.

Reviewer 6: Can we add a goal to allow the user the option of pre-load or lazily-load as there will be times when it is time intensive where pre-loading is more suitable than lazy loading?

## Specification

The proposal is to adopt the existing mechnism used in Bash, Zsh and Fish's completion system --
have directories contain individual completion scripts for various commands and applications,
whose file names should match names of the commands.

> Those completion scripts are loaded only when their corresponding commands' completion is triggered for the first time.

Reviewer 6: This would be true in a lazy load scenario, but not in a preload scenario

We will have separate directories for feedback providers and tab-completers, for 2 reasons:

- Trigger is different
  - feedback provider for a specific native command -- execute the command will trigger the discovery.
  - tab-completer for a specific native command -- tab complete on the command will trigger the discovery.
- Implementation is different
  - feedback provider -- a module or an assembly (binary implementation only)
  - tab-completer -- a module or a script (binary or script implementation)

The folders for feedback providers and tab-completers will be placed under the same path where modules folders are currently located:

> - In-box path: `$PSHOME/feedbacks` and `$PSHOME/completions`

Reviewer 7: Nit: Shouldn't the directories use CamelCase names, to match all the other dirs? (Modules, Scripts,...)

    - use the expanded value as the module name for module loading

#### Execution Flow

1. At startup, auto-load the enabled feedback providers from the `_startup_` folder of the `feedbacks` paths. Do the auto-loading before processing user's profile.
2. Report what feedback providers were processed and the time taken, in the streaming way.
3. In `NativeCommandProcessor`, when a native command gets executed,
   - Check if a feedback provider for this native command is available in the `feedbacks` paths;
   - If so, check if the specified module already loaded;
   - If not, load it at the `DoComplete` phase, so the feedback provider will be ready right after the native command finishes.

**[NOTE:]** It would be better if we can check if a feedback provider for the native command has already registered before checking the paths,
but unlike the completer registration for native commands, today there is no mapping between a feedback provider and a native command.
Also, it's allowed to register multiple feedback providers for a single native command.

#### Discussion Points

1. Should we add another key to indicate the target OS?

>    - A feedback provider may only work on a specific OS, such as the `"WinGet CommandNotFound"` feedback provider only works on Windows.

Reviewer 6: That would require an update to the module manifest, would it not? Or is that what you are proposing here?

   - Such a key could be handy if a user wants to share the feedback/tab-completer configurations among multiple machines via a cloud drive.

> 2. Do we really need a folder for each feedback provider?

Reviewer 6: Ideally not

3. Today, a user can unregister a tab-completer by running `Register-ArgumentCompleter -CommandName <name> -ScriptBlock $null`.
   But it doesn't remove the `<name>` from cache, but only sets its value to `null`. We probably should fix it to make our cache lookup simpler.

4. Today, a user cannot see what commands have tab-completer registered. This may be out-of-scope for this RFC.

### When to enable/disable the feature

This feature is only for interactive session, so we need to decide on when the feature is enabled and when is disabled.

1. The feature only works when the PowerShell host is `ConsoleHost` or the `Visual Studio Code Host` (which uses `ConsoleHost` internally IIRC).
   - Today, only `ConsoleHost` consumes feedback providers.
2. The feature should be disabled when PowerShell starts with `-Command` or `-File` to run a command or a file and then terminates.
   - So, when `-noexit` is specifeid, the feature should be enabled if other conditions are satisfied.
2. Shall we disable the feature with the `-noninteractive` flag?

>    - `PSReadLine` is disabled when this flag is specified, so maybe this feature should be disabled too.

Reviewer 6: Makes sense

5. We report progress when loading `feedback` or `completer` at startup, so how to allow users to disable the progress report?
   - We have the `-NoProfileLoadTime` flag today to not show the time taken for running profile.
6. How about on a System Lockdown Mode (SLM) or Restricted remoting environments?
   - We use `.psd1` file for metadata, which can be signed if needed.

### Unified Location for load-at-startup Configurations

There could be a similar demand for a predictor module. There won't be a specific trigger for any predictors,
so for a predictor to be auto-discovered, it has to be loaded at the startup of an interactive session.

Given that, maybe it's better to have a unified location for all the load-at-startup configurations:

- Have a `startup` folder at the same level of `feedbacks` and `completions` folders;
- All modules or scripts that need to be processed at session startup should have configurations deployed in the `startup` folder.

Each item within `startup` is a folder, whose name should be the friendly name of the component, e.g. `"UnixTabCompletion"`.

> Within each sub-folder, a `.psd1` file named after the folder name should be defined to configure the auto-discovery of the component.

Reviewer 7: As I mentioned in a comment above, this sounds exactly like the `Modules` folder, except with a different manifest structure. I'd prefer to reuse modules for this rather than defining another mechanism.

@{
   module = '<module-name-or-path>[@<version>]',  # Module to load.
   script = '<script-path>',  # Script to run.
   arguments = @('<arg1>', '<arg2>'),  # Optional arguments for module loading or script invocation.
   disable = $false,  # Control whether auto-discovery should find this completer.
}
```

The configuration processing will be the same as what is described in the [Tab Completer](#tab-completer) section above.
Again, the `module` key take precedence. So, if both `module` and `script` keys are present, `script` will be ignored.

## Appx and MSIX Apps

What is discussed above requires a tool to deploy configurations to a pre-defined location during installation.
However, an Appx/MSIX package on Windows may be isolated and thus cannot access the location. See [some constraints](https://github.com/PowerShell/PowerShell/issues/17283#issuecomment-1522133126).
Therefore, to support auto-discovery of PowerShell resources like argument completer that come along with an Appx/MSIX package,
PowerShell has to proactively inspect the package instead of depending on the app registering its resources with the mechanism described above.

### Expose resources with App Extension

> MSIX' standard recommendation is for the packaged app to declare an `appExtension` in its manifest.

Reviewer 3: Or a `packageExtension`, as of 10.0.26100.0 (aka Ge)

```
<uap18:Extension Category="windows.packageExtension">
  <uap3:PackageExtension...>
    ...
```

Similar to appExtension but other than app->package naming, it can appear in any package (windows.appExtension can only appear in Main+Optional packages)

If you don't otherwise have an application in your package (e.g. "I just want *.ps1, completers and other Powershell plugins/extenders") you can use windows.appExtension. Possible, but unnecessary friction so why bother.

```xml
<Applications>
   ...

   <Extensions>
      <uap3:Extension Category="windows.appExtension">
         <uap3:AppExtension Name="add-in-contract" Id="add-in" PublicFolder="Public" DisplayName="Sample Add-in" Description="This is a sample add-in">
            <uap3:Properties>
               <!--Free form space-->
            </uap3:Properties>
         </uap3:AppExtension>
      </uap3:Extension>
   </Extensions>
</Application>
```

In this example, you will notice a `Properties` element within the `AppExtension` element [[reference]](https://github.com/MicrosoftDocs/msix-docs/blob/main/msix-src/msix-sdk/sdk-guidance.md#how-to-effectively-use-the-same-package-on-all-platforms-windows-10-and-non-windows-10). 
There is no validation performed in this section of the manifest file,
and this allows tool developers to specify the resources exposed to PowerShell.

An example would look like this:

```xml
<uap3:Extension Category="windows.appExtension">
   <uap3:AppExtension
      Name="com.microsoft.powershell.resources"
      Id="winget.powershell"
      PublicFolder="public"
      DisplayName="WinGet PowerShell Resources">
         <uap3:Properties>

>             <Completer Type="Script" Name="winget.completer" File="assets\winget.completer.s1" />

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
            <Completer Type="Script" Name="winget.completer" File="assets\winget.completer.ps1" />
```

foreach (var extension in catalog)
{
    ...use it...
}
```

Note that `AppExtensionCatalog` is a WinRT type. It implies that changes will be needed to the project file to use the API,
e.g. the `TargetFramework` needs to be Windows specific such as `net9.0-windows10.0.19041.0`.
This may be a trouble to PowerShell as it's cross-platform.

#### Execution flow for discovery

In PowerShell, we want lazy discovery for resources like argument completer,
meaning that the discovery happens only when user press `wt.exe <tab>` for the first time, for example. 
A hypothetical discovery process would naturally be like:
1.	Is `wt.exe` an app execution alias of a MSIX package?
2.	Yes, it is from the MSIX package "WindowsTerminal"<br/>
   --> Check if the package offers extension for PowerShell resources, such as an argument completer.
3.	Yes, access the resources.

There are 2 blockers in this hypothetical discovery process:
- `wt.exe` is essentially a reparse point. The API to get its target is undocumented. PowerShell used to detect its target but then reverted due to the undocumented API (see [PR#10331] and [PR#16044]).

>    **What is the suggested way to find the Appx/MSIX package that owns an app execution alias?**

Reviewer 3: Grubbing through the filesystem to discover the associated package is fragile - in the 'reliability' and 'security' perspectives. Not recommended.

Likewise, a reverse lookup enumerating every package to determine its filesystem artifacts, and then (correctly) know when the latter is about to be used is also fragile in reliability and security, _and_ poses additional perf costs. Not recommended.

windows.packageExtension (like windows.appExtension) was invented for this very reason - to 'discover' what packages offer a desired functionality, and to do so in a reliable, secure and efficient manner.

- In the 2nd step above, we’re only interested in "WindowsTerminal". The call `AppExtensionCatalog.Open("com.microsoft.powershell.resources")` will return all extensions with this name,

>   but **is there a way to query a specific package about its extension information?**

Reviewer 3: A sort of `AppExtensionCatalog.OpenForPackage("com.microsoft.powershell.resources", package)`, equivalent to

```
list = []
FOREACH ae IN AppExtensionCatalog.Open("com.microsoft.powershell.resources").FindAll()
    IF ae.Package == package
        list += package
return list
```

?

However, there are a few potential issues that will restrict where and how we can support it in PowerShell:

1. There are 2 implementation of the API -- the Windows App SDK's dynamic dependency API AND the Windows 11's dynamic dependency API.
   Only the Windows 11's implementation supports referencing and using a main package and
   The Windows App SDK's implementation can only target a framework package [[reference]](https://learn.microsoft.com/windows/apps/desktop/modernize/framework-packages/use-the-dynamic-dependency-api#reference-and-use-a-main-package-windows-app-sdk-limitation).
   In our scenario, the extension for PowerShell resource should be declared in the tool's package, namely the main package.
   - A main package is the primary package that contains the core application binaries, assets, and manifest that define the app’s identity, capabilities, and behavior.
   - A framework package is a special type of MSIX package that contains shared code, libraries, or resources used by one or more apps — but does not contain an app itself.

2. The Windows 11's implementation targets Windows 11, version 22H2 (10.0; Build 22621), and later.

>    It only provides C and C++ functions, no WinRT types, unlike the Windows App SDK's implementation.

Reviewer 3: WinAppSDK provides Dynamic Dependencies' WinRT API

* WinAppSDK's WinRT API is wrapper over WinAppSDK's Win32/C API
* On Win11 10.0.26100.0+ (aka Ge) WinAppSDK's DynamicDepedency API is a thin passthru to the OS DynDep API
QED: Use WinAppSDK's WinRT API on >=26100 and you're using WinRT to call into the OS DynDep API

Whether that's desirable over calling the OS DynDep Win32/C API or not is your choice.

Reviewer 3: P.S. You can access the Win11 OS DynDep API via Powershell today

https://github.com/microsoft/WindowsAppSDK/tree/main/dev/DynamicDependency/Powershell

These don't require WinRT or pose other challenges, other than requiring Windows >= 10.0.26100.0

These are checked in but not shipped, as there's currently no good answer to "How do I ship Powershell cmdlets in an MSIX package?" :-(

If you look closely you can see `MsixDynamicDependency.psm1` does the heavy lifting via Powershell's `Add-Type -TypeDefinition` with C# and `[DllImport(...)]` attributes to call into the OS DynDep Win32/C API. No added native code so no additional DLL, or .NET version dependencies, or other complexities to resolve.

If only there were a (good) way for Powershell to use cmdlets from an MSIX package... :D

> 3. I believe the Windows 11's implementation will provide WinRT types eventually.

Reviewer 3: There's currently no plans or intentions to do so. WinAppSDK's WinRT types with `Mdd*()` passthrough to the OS APIs meet all the known needs not otherwise met by directly calling the OS Win32/C API.

If you find a scenario where this is insufficient please let us know.

   But consuming WinRT types would requires changes to the project, e.g. the `TargetFramework` needs to be Windows specific such as `net9.0-windows10.0.19041.0`.
   This may cause problem to PowerShell as it's cross-platform.

It means we can only support the feature in Windows 11, and only by using C/C++ functions for now.
When WinRT support comes in future, we may have trouble switching to that.

### Overall thinking about Appx/MSIX

The above discussion shows Appx/MSIX describes the App Extension for an app to declare PowerShell resources,
as well as for PowerShell to discover and access the resources inside the app pacakge.

However, there are still missing parts to the feature we are looking at in this spec:

1. How to deal with the resources that are supposed to be loaded at startup of PowerShell session, such as the `WinGetNotFound` feedback provider?
   - Technically, we can defined a special extension namespace for apps to declare such resources with.
     Then at startup, we get all extensions with that namespace and load all of them.
   - But, would that be performant enough to do at the startup?

> 2. How to resolve an App Execution Alias to the actual app package? (undocumented API)

Reviewer 3: This is currently not supported, and I'm highly doubtful it's viable or desirable, for the reasons previously stated.

> 3. How to get the `AppExtension` information from a specific app package? (without parsing the app manifest ourselves)

Reviewer 3: I think you're right, the current API doesn't provide this today.

You can emulate it (as noted above), but an API doing this could be more efficient. If this interests you please let us know.

(IMO this would seem a worthy enhancement. But devil's in the details of course)

4. How to allow user to disable the auto-discovery/loading of PowerShell resources from a particular Appx/MSIX app?

>    - Shall we have configurations for indivual Appx/MSIX apps only for the purpose of disabling?

Reviewer 3: The 'allow/deny list' concept.

One way is like AppExecutionAlias in Settings, the user can individually control which are enabled or disabled (and similar knobs for administrators to control/override). Upsides to Settings management but that may not be feasible here (for technical and/or non-technical reasons). Alternatively, Powershell tracking allow/deny is simple enough e.g.

```
bool isEnabled = ApplicationData.LocalSettings["MSIX"]["Packages"][packagefamilyname]["Enabled"];
...
ApplicationData.LocalSettings["MSIX"]["Packages"][packagefamilyname]["Enabled"] = false;
```

5. How to cache the information that an Appx/MSIX package doesn't have any PS resources declared and avoid the auto-discovery for it when user is using the tool?

Given that supporting auto-discovery/loading for Appx/MSIX packages is completely different from other applications,

> It warrants another RFC to design for it specifically.

Reviewer 3: Got link?
